---
day: 25
year: 2016
---

Copies in code from [Day 23](23) with new `out` command. This is a little rougher than [Day 23](23) due to infinite
loop nature of the default program. Therefore, I recommend you enter `i === 29` for the **Break On** conditional.

## Op codes

### `cpy x y`
`cpy x y`_copies_ `x` (either an integer or the _value_ of a register) into register `y`.

### `inc x`
`inc x` _increases_ the value of register `x` by one.
 
### `dec x`
`dec x` _decreases_ the value of register `x` by one.
 
### `jnz x y` 
`jnz x y` _jumps_ to an instruction `y` away (positive means forward; negative means backward), but only if `x` is _not zero_.
 
### `tgl x`
`tgl x` _toggles_ the instruction `x` away (pointing at instructions like `jnz` does: positive means forward; negative means backward):
 *   - For _one-argument_ instructions, `inc` becomes `dec`, and all other one-argument instructions become `inc`.
 *   - For _two-argument_ instructions, `jnz` becomes `cpy`, and all other two-instructions become `jnz`.
 *   - The arguments of a toggled instruction are _not affected_.
 *   - If an attempt is made to toggle an instruction outside the program, _nothing happens_.
 *   - If toggling produces an _invalid instruction_ (like `cpy 1 2`) and an attempt is later made to execute that instruction, `skip it instead`.
 *   - If `tgl` toggles _itself_ (for example, if `a` is `0`, `tgl a` would target itself and become `inc a`), the resulting instruction is not executed until the next time it is reached.

### `out x`
`out x` _transmits_ `x` (either an integer or the _value_ of a register) as the next value for the clock signal.


## Interactive Application 💻

<style>
    .root {
        font-family: monospace;
        font-size: 12px;
    }

    .root table {
        border-spacing: 0;
    }

    /* Override built-in table stylings */
    .markdown-body .root table th,
    .markdown-body .root table td {
        padding: 1px;
        border: none;
    }
    .markdown-body .root table tr {
        border-top: none;
        background: none;
    }

    .device > * {
        padding: 0.5em;
        border: 1px solid gainsboro;
    }

    @media (min-width: 700px) {
        .device {
            display: flex;
        }

        .device > * + * {
            border-left: none;
        }
    }

    .active {
        background: #f5f5f5;
        font-weight: bold;
    }
</style>

<div class="root" id="root"></div>

<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/react/16.10.2/umd/react.production.min.js" integrity="sha256-kHzwNYrCFiiWZjqmRupBU8LYKWYt1LrpoojN8Kmv84c=" crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/react-dom/16.10.2/umd/react-dom.production.min.js" integrity="sha256-h2FCY1kn1qwXfMbwHXuDN15oigd8pYcz4KUnl4cAdB0=" crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
<script src="{{ "/assets/js/2016/25/main.bundle.js" | relative_url }}"></script>
