---
title: Day 13 - Care Package
day: 13
year: 2019
---

<details>
    <summary>Part One and Part Two Descriptions</summary>
<article class="day-desc"><h2>--- Day 13: Care Package ---</h2><p>As you ponder the solitude of space and the ever-increasing three-hour roundtrip for messages between you and Earth, you notice that the Space Mail Indicator Light is blinking.  To help keep you sane, the Elves have sent you a care package.</p>
<p>It's a new game for the ship's <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arcade_cabinet">arcade cabinet</a>! Unfortunately, the arcade is <em>all the way</em> on the other end of the ship. Surely, it won't be hard to build your own - the care package even comes with schematics.</p>
<p>The arcade cabinet runs <a href="https://adventofcode.com/2019/day/9">Intcode</a> software like the game the Elves sent (your puzzle input). It has a primitive screen capable of drawing square <em>tiles</em> on a grid.  The software draws tiles to the screen with output instructions: every three output instructions specify the <code>x</code> position (distance from the left), <code>y</code> position (distance from the top), and <code>tile id</code>. The <code>tile id</code> is interpreted as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><code>0</code> is an <em>empty</em> tile.  No game object appears in this tile.</li>
<li><code>1</code> is a <em>wall</em> tile.  Walls are indestructible barriers.</li>
<li><code>2</code> is a <em>block</em> tile.  Blocks can be broken by the ball.</li>
<li><code>3</code> is a <em>horizontal paddle</em> tile.  The paddle is indestructible.</li>
<li><code>4</code> is a <em>ball</em> tile.  The ball moves diagonally and bounces off objects.</li>
</ul>
<p>For example, a sequence of output values like <code>1,2,3,6,5,4</code> would draw a <em>horizontal paddle</em> tile (<code>1</code> tile from the left and <code>2</code> tiles from the top) and a <em>ball</em> tile (<code>6</code> tiles from the left and <code>5</code> tiles from the top).</p>
<p>Start the game. <em>How many block tiles are on the screen when the game exits?</em></p>
</article>
<article class="day-desc"><h2 id="part2">--- Part Two ---</h2><p>The game didn't run because you didn't put in any quarters. Unfortunately, you did not bring any <span title="You do have crew quarters, but they won't fit in the machine.">quarters</span>. Memory address <code>0</code> represents the number of quarters that have been inserted; set it to <code>2</code> to play for free.</p>
<p>The arcade cabinet has a <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joystick">joystick</a> that can move left and right.  The software reads the position of the joystick with input instructions:</p>
<ul>
<li>If the joystick is in the <em>neutral position</em>, provide <code>0</code>.</li>
<li>If the joystick is <em>tilted to the left</em>, provide <code>-1</code>.</li>
<li>If the joystick is <em>tilted to the right</em>, provide <code>1</code>.</li>
</ul>
<p>The arcade cabinet also has a <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Display_device#Segment_displays">segment display</a> capable of showing a single number that represents the player's current score. When three output instructions specify <code>X=-1, Y=0</code>, the third output instruction is not a tile; the value instead specifies the new score to show in the segment display.  For example, a sequence of output values like <code>-1,0,12345</code> would show <code>12345</code> as the player's current score.</p>
<p>Beat the game by breaking all the blocks. <em>What is your score after the last block is broken?</em></p>
</article>
</details>

This one was pretty tricky, and required a fair amount of manually inspecting the data
and rendering the points as pixels on an HTML canvas.

At the end of the day, I got the answer by actually _seeing_ it, recreated below:

<video autoplay muted src="{{ "/assets/media/2019-day-13-visualization.mp4" | relative_url }}">
